AMS 2300.HN1			American Popular Culture			Dr. Erin Smith


This course examines American culture through some of its most popular cultural forms—best-selling novels, magazines, advertising, television, Hollywood films, sports, and popular music. Although we will make connections between the present and the past, the course is focused specifically on the popular culture of the Cold War (mainly 1950s and 1960s) through Hollywood films, pulp novels, television sit-coms and early rock music. We will consider such topics as: norms about gender and sexuality; the post-War religious revival and its co-existence with increasingly secular ways of being in the world; the Cold War and efforts to contain communism abroad; race and early civil rights activity; class and consumption in burgeoning suburbs.



GOVT 2306	State and Local Government						Dr. Euel Elliott


This course is designed to provide students in the Honors program with an introduction to Texas’s State government and politics. The course covers topics related to state government and the public policy process that are especially relevant of students preparing for a career in medicine. The course begins with a discussion of Texas political culture and the political economy of Texas within the framework of federalism, and the Texas Constitution. The course then proceeds to a discussion of political parties, elections, state government structures and public policy. Given the relatively small class size, the course will be conducted primarily through seminar-type discussions and periodic student presentations. There will also be guest presentations scheduled strategically during the semester. Also, it is crucial that the student will have read the material prior to class and be prepared to discuss.



GOVT 2306	State and Local Government					Dr. Douglas Dow


This honors seminar is designed as an introduction to the constitutional structure, institutional processes and political cultures of Texas, within the federal system of the United States. Our first goal will be to understand how American sub-national politics is contoured by its ever-evolving federal constitutional system. We will seek answers to a number of questions: What were the origins of the federal design in the American Constitution? How do the historical beginnings of government continue to shape contemporary politics? How have powers been divided and shared between the national government and the states? What are the functions of state government? How does the Texas Constitution resemble and differ from the U.S. Constitution? What has been the history of civil rights and liberties protection, and its impact on Texas state authority?

The second goal of the course will be to understand those processes and institutions through which citizens behave politically. What is political culture? How are state and local politics shaped by political pluralism? How do people come to articulate political beliefs? What kinds of groups do people create and join to promote their ideas and interests? How do these groups interact with governmental actors themselves? We shall explore the development and evolution of political parties, the growing dominance of interest groups, the importance of public opinion and the role of political culture in shaping the information Texans have about their government and society.



GOVT 2306	State and Local Government					Dr. Edward Harpham


This honors readings course will involve an in-depth study of politics and government in Texas. It meets one portion of the core state requirement in government.  Upon completing the class, students will be able to:
    1) Explain the role that the Texas Constitution plays in shaping governmental institutions and politics.
    2) Explain and assess the place of Texas in the federal system of government in the United States.
    3) Describe the way in which the legislative, executive and judicial branches work and affect public policy in Texas
    4) Identify the demographic and economic challenges that face state and local government in Texas today and suggest solutions to these problems



NSC 3361	Introduction to Neuroscience				Eva LaDow


This course serves as an introduction to the field of neuroscience. It is a survey of neurobiology from the cellular building blocks of the brain regions and processes that underlie vision, hearing, language, sex, emotion, hunger, thirst, and more. We’ll also discuss psychoactive drugs, mental illness, and how we learn and remember.  Students will describe the anatomy and organization of the nervous system as it relates to a number of important physiological processes and behaviors. Students will describe the basic cell b Students will describe the basic cell biology and pharmacology of the nervous system, with a focus on synaptic transmission. Students will apply this knowledge to analyze how perturbing specific brain regions or neurotransmission may alter behavior. Students will also describe central principles of behavioral neuroscience such as homeostasis and plasticity.



NSC 3361	Neuropharmacology						Dr. Eva LaDow


This course provides an in-depth exploration of synaptic transmission, signal transduction, and structure/activity relationships of psychoactive drugs. We will begin with basic principles of pharmacology, including basic pharmacokinetics and dynamics to provide a broad framework for how we understand drug action and elimination by the body.  We will then consider 1) universal features of synaptic transmission and vesicular neurotransmitter release; 2) typical amine neurotransmitter systems, both ionotropic and metabotropic; and finally 3) peptide and atypical neurotransmitters such as endocannabinoids. We will cover pharmacology relevant to each system, including laboratory and clinical uses.  We will also discuss drugs of abuse and the neural basis for addiction. Neuropharmacology is a core course for the neuroscience major, but may be of strong interest for other biological science majors and pre-health students.



PSCI 4396	Approaches to Peace		Dr. Paul F. Diehl


Are India and Pakistan or the US and North Korea at peace simply because they are not at war?  Is Dallas at peace because no one was shot today?  This Honors course looks beyond “peace as the absence of violence” to explore what peace is and how it might be achieved through various approaches (see the course syllabus posted in Coursebook).  There are several unique features of the course:
    • No prerequisites and suitable for freshmen to seniors and students from all majors.
    • Interdisciplinary orientation, with topics and issues from biology, religious studies, history, anthropology, engineering, political science, philosophy, psychology, and economics
    • Simulations and games: nuclear war, negotiations, “cake-cutting”
    • Movies, music, cartoons and more about peace
    • No final exam; all major requirements completed before final exam week.



SOC 1301		Introduction to Sociology				Dr. Sheryl Skaggs


This course provides an overview of the discipline of sociology, introducing students to major concepts, theories, scholars and research. Students will learn how to view and understand the world around them by considering connections between behavior, outcomes and social context. In other words, students will learn how one’s social environment influences behavior, opportunities and outcomes. Topics to be covered in the course include: 1) the sociological imagination and the work of C. Wright Mills in examining social phenomena; 2) key sociological theoretical perspectives; 3) methodological approaches to examining sociological questions; 4) examination of major concepts and principles of sociology. The course is designed not only to develop knowledge about the field of sociology but also to apply the information to issues related to health and health care, race/ethnicity, education, culture, work, and families. The class format will be a combination of lectures and seminar discussion. Student attendance and participation are critical to the learning environment.



SOC 4372 	Health and Illness					Dr. Richard Scotch


Medicine is a social science, as much as it is a biological science.  Who gets sick, what they do about it, and what kind of treatment they receive are the result of an interplay of behavioral, cultural, and social forces. In this course we will examine how behavioral, social, and cultural factors affect health and illness. We will also address a number of  ethic issues in health care decision making. This class will involve lectures by the instructor, presentations on the readings by students, seminar discussion, and occasional guest lectures and media presentations.  

In this course, students will learn about 1) social and demographic factors associated with health and illness, including social class, race/ethnicity, gender, and education; 2) how social scientists have interpreted health and illness behavior; 3) the nature of American health professions and institutions, and how these professions and institutions are responding to recent economic, social, political, and technological trends; and 4) ethical values and dilemmas found within the American health care system. 



HONS 3199.HN1 	Readings in Medicine, Politics & Philosophy	Dr. Edward Harpham


This honors readings course will involve a close reading of a select group of texts related to medicine, politics and philosophy.  Upon completing the class, students will be able to:
    1) Identify a number of different genres of literature related to the field of medicine.
    2) Explain different ways in which historians have conceptualized the history of medicine as a profession through the study of disease.
    3) Discuss some of the major philosophical, clinical, and practical problems facing medical practitioners in medicine in the 21st century as they attempt to empower patients in their own healthcare.



HONS 3199.HN2 	Readings in Foreign Film & Political Culture		Dr. Douglas Dow 


Film is the newest of the art forms, and the most popular style of entertainment of the past century. Movies are one of the most powerful tools for shaping popular tastes and beliefs, including perceptions and expectations concerning the government, the workplace, religion, and the family. The influence of cinema on politics is high; so too is the impact of external political, social and economic forces on movies and the film industry. This class is designed as an introduction to domestic and world cinema, and an exploration of the complex dynamics between films and politics. 

Each week, we will explore a single film from a number of different contexts. We will animate the political and social concerns behind the film’s theme and chart the histories of government influence upon the fate of each film. We will explore how each film exemplifies a particular national film movement, or reflects the evolving identity of a specific movie genre. We will also learn how to “read” a film, in order to better comprehend how its messages are conveyed through style, editing, shot composition, and other techniques of film making. 
HONS 3199.HN3	Readings in the Internet & Public Policy			Dr. Ravi Prakash
Just a few decades back, Usenet provided total anonymity and privacy where people could adopt any persona and interact with others. These days there appears to be no anonymity, with every keystroke, mouse-click, and location change being logged and analyzed by multiple entities. How did things change so drastically and in such a short period of time?



HONS 3199.H12	Readings in Science Fiction				Christina Thompson


Science fiction writing often asks the question what if? What if there were machines that looked like and could do the work of humans?  What if man could go to the moon?  These questions and others have inspired scientists for generations to push the boundaries of what is possible. In this Science in Science Fiction readings course we will read short science fiction stories from a science perspective. Students will learn to identify and discuss a broad range of scientific topics found in literature, from chemistry and biology to robotics and space flight. We will explore the accuracy of how scientific ideas are presented, and the impact that speculative science can have on technology development in the real world.  



HONS 3199		Readings in Memory					Dr. Eva LaDow


The brain is a fundamentally plastic organ, able to store information and shape its responses based on experience.  Memory in its many forms is essential for our day-to-day existence, and so disruptions in memory have profound clinical implications. Aberrations in memory formation underlie neurological disorders including addiction and post-traumatic stress disorder. Diseases where memories are lost, such as Alzheimer’s, are devastating. How does memory work?  Where in the brain do memories live? What is the biological basis of memory storage, and how reliable is it? What happens when we can’t trust our memories, when we can’t make new memories, or when we lose the memories we once had? In this course we will explore the importance and fragility of memory through clinical cases, memories, and scientific literature.



HONS 3199	Readings in Faulkner’s Short Stories		Dr. Theresa M. Towner


Famed for his work as a novelist, the Mississippi-born William Faulkner was an equally accomplished writer of short fiction.  He once described the short story as “the most demanding form after poetry,” and this course will examine the various ways in which the forty-two of his Collected Stories meet those demands.  I will not assume any previous knowledge of or experience with reading Faulkner.



HONS 3199.H15	Untold Histories of Chemistry and Physics		Mihaela Stefan


Spectacular discoveries at the end of the 19th century and the beginning of 20th century advanced the knowledge in the fields of chemistry and physics. Relativity, atomic theory, quantum mechanics, radioactivity, periodicity of elements, X-ray crystallography, theories of bonding in organic compounds, elucidation of structure of DNA are some of the most revolutionary discoveries that were made during this time. The history of physics and chemistry is documented in many books and many biographies of physicists and chemists have been published. Scientists work together in teams or alone to make discoveries that are expected to advance the level of knowledge in their field of research. The Nobel prizes reward "those who, during the preceding year, shall have conferred the greatest benefit on mankind". Many deserving scientists were recognized with Nobel prizes for their work but other have been overlooked. In this course we will discuss why some scientists have not received a Nobel prize for discoveries that deserved recognition. Another topic we will discuss in this course is the ethical problem that some discoveries brought in. For example, the two world wars forced scientists to consider ethical questions about the application of their research on the society. The selected book for this course is “Cathedrals of Science: The Personalities and Rivalries That Made Modern Chemistry” by Patrick Coffey. This book reviews a seventy-year time span from 1883 to 1953, in which profound discoveries changed the faces of physics and chemistry. Principal actors scientists in the book are Svante Arrhenius, Walther Nernst, Gilbert Newton Lewis, Irving Langmuir, Fritz Haber, and Linus Pauling. Supporting roles in the book are Jacobus van’t Hoff, Whilhelm Ostwald, Paul Ehrlich, Theodore Richards, William Harkins, Harold Urey, Glenn Seaborg, and Dorothy Wrinch. 
